Artist’s Statement:
The AnyDay Music Machine
<><><>
By: Alana DeVito
////
Interaction Summary:
Interaction is straight forward. User enters a city in the input box and presses submit. If the city exists (or is not a really obscure location or in a different language) the sound composition will sound and ripples will begin to animate on the canvas. The user may choose a light or dark theme and the dialog box will close. The user can access the dialog box again by finding and pressing the ¯\_(ツ)\_/¯ button. Any changes will modulate the composition or visual without interruption. Users are encouraged to project the visualization on a wall and let the AnyDay Music Machine fill their environment with a beautiful, modal composition. Take a trip around the world to hear the different compositions hidden in different forecasts.
////
The AnyDay Music Machine is an anthropomorphic generative composer that takes the weather in a user’s chosen location (it does not have to be their current location necessarily) and uses the parameters of the detailed forecast description, the temperature (in Celcius) and the humidity (percentage) to create a generative composition using a bank of specially designed, tone specific synth and orchestral sound samples. Using music theory based on “modal music” and the 8 “Church” or Gregorian modes, Ionian, Lydian, Mixolydian, Aeolian, Dorian, Phrygian and Locrian, the composition will have sonic or tonal colour that represents the specific weather descriptions received from the OpenWeather API for that chosen location. Modes and modal music have been chosen for this project due to its expressive and emotional nature inspired by the different variants on certain degrees of the ‘standard’ scales (major and minor). For this iteration, the key for all modal compositions is B-flat, also chosen for its dramatic and expressive quality, which compliments the modal music technique. Below is a small summary of some emotions or feelings inspired by the specific modes:
Ionian - Happy, positive, bright, innocent, reassuring, cheery, joyous and played at a slower tempo it can sound royal and majestic.
Lydian - Uplifting and quirky, floating and fantasy-like.
Mixolydian – Happy, but serious.
Dorian - Sad, but hopeful.
Aeolian – Sad.
Phrygian – Dark, heavy, scary, dramatic, and otherworldly.
Locrian – Evil, scary, dramatic, and otherworldly.
Note: The weatherModes object starting on line 779 of the weatherScape.js code carries all of the possible weather forecast descriptions and matches them with a mode that best represents that weather’s emotional quality, hence, the anthropomorphic application of human emotion to weather systems.
Humidity and temperature values also create uniqueness and variation for each location-specific/weather-specific composition. The humidity percentage determines the timing between the triggering of each note (so, the intervalMultiple which effects the intervalTiming), and the temperature determines which sound texture / sound bank is accessed most for each note – for example, the first half of the *notes*BufferList are more lush sounding pad synths, while the second half are orchestral instruments (bass, cello, harp, violin and celesta). Since there is a ‘lushness’ to the synths, these correspond with more balmy, comfortable weather (between 10 and 26 degrees) while the orchestra recalls ‘an inside environment’ which would be synonymous with weather that encourages indoor presence – thus, weather below 10 degrees and above 26. Humidity percentage is taken into the calculation of the interval timing between the notes playing; the higher the humidity the longer the interval timings and accordingly, a slower feeling composition (recalling the slow, ‘sludgy’ feeling that high humidity brings). This element – intervalTiming – varies, still, throughout the composition to give anticipation, tension, peak and compositional flow to the sound piece; for the first 5 notes the intervals are longer, easing the listener into the composition, and between 5 and 10 speed up slightly before hitting a faster rhythm after 10 and then its fastest rhythm between notes 20 and 60. It slows again after 60 before starting back around after 80 notes.
To accomplish the changing and generative sonic textures of the compositions, logic based on weighted indexes was employed to create a hierarchy of notes within each mode. To hear the tonal colour of each mode, certain notes within the scale (modes are types of scales) must be prioritized against others. The weightings of the modes are created by taking the weightings determined by the mode selected and making a number of copies of that *note*BufferList depending on its importance (for example, the root note at index position 0 is almost always the most important, so there must be 7 copies of it). The weightings parameter with all the copies is sent into a function called ‘random’ which then takes the weightings array and selects a random number based on the length of that weightings array. That number indicates the index that will then determine which note (the degree of the scale or mode) needs to be accessed. The *note*bufferLists (replace the _note_ with a note, for example, ‘a’ for that note bufferList – for the variable for the ‘a’ note bufferList is aBufferList) contains 2 groupings of sounds, with 8 sub-groups in the first half (index[0]-index[7]) and 12 sub-groups in the second half (index[8]-index[19]) – the second half are pre-fixed with ORC, representing ‘orchestra’ which represents the sound samples used (BBC Orchestra Sound Pack to be specific, while the first half is remodelled classic, or retro synthesizers from Arturia such as the Synthi, and the Mellotron). There are 12 *note*bufferLists in total, representing each of the 12 semi-tones in an octave. These 2 banks are titled, ‘temperate’ or ‘extreme’ representing the temperature that connects the selection probability of each sound bank.
For the visual aspect of the program, multicoloured ripples are drawn on the canvas every time a note is played at the corresponding X location reflected by the mapping of the index of the note played and a random Y location, and the RGB color ripples are mapped to those determined X and Y values. The radius of each ripple is controlled by the randomly determined gain value of that note (the note intensity or velocity) – set between 0.1 and 0.5 of the full digital amplitude scale of 1. As the composition self-generates, the ripples’ rings increase in size until they reach ‘20’ pix/units, which then triggers a refresh of the canvas, starting blank with ripples of thin lines that grow again.
JQUERY and JQUERY UI have been utilized for some design elements of the interface, including the dialog boxes and corresponding button where the user chooses their location and the shade of the visualization, as well as the rippling, movable title.
////
